It recently came to my attention that, despite having been publishing content on the internet for 10 years (since the halcyon days of the Wu Wei WordPress theme and the old wp-admin editor, which produced [these](https://commissaress.wordpress.com/) [gems](https://weeklyworker.co.uk/worker/authors/commissaress/)), I lacked a central page to tell anyone interested about myself and my projects, and would have to resort to using my LinkedIn biography. Deciding to right this wrong, I created this page as a repository for things I've worked on over the past few years and goals I've set for the near future. I hope that this will allow me to 'tell my story', as it were, to anyone who doesn't know me (and maybe some people who do).

(And if you did come here from my LinkedIn biography, here's my [CV](https://drive.google.com/file/d/10QYxhQ4vw55KYoDQZo5JtG4nGQBrhlWi/view?usp=sharing).)

I'm in my last year of a Linguistics undergrad degree at Trinity College, University of Cambridge, and just finished my [undergrad thesis](https://github.com/ashnaahmad/dissertation-files) on computational cognitive modelling. More specifically, my thesis was an attempt to use machine learning to simulate some of the processes which occur in the human brain when we process complex syntax. I wanted to bring together computational methods, which I had always intended to specialise in, and elements of the psychology module which I had chosen as a wildcard in my second year at university and unexpectedly adored. The 'connectionist' tradition in the cognitive sciences, which this module introduced me to, opened my eyes to the fact that the immense recent progress in computational language modelling has many applications beyond the optimisation of NLP models; it can also be used to tell us more about largely ill-understood areas of cognition. 

This project was the culmination of a 5-year academic trajectory which may well have been as turbulent as the Unprecedented Times they took place in (yep, I'm a proud graduate of Zoom University). I started life at Cambridge as a French and Russian language student, buoyed by a genuine passion for French and Russian literature - but also, shamelessly, because my career objective as a 15/16-year-old was to be an international spy. I recreationally wrote [this essay](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JGnuGa0XSlD5JLOq12uNvXPadrR_tXI0/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=117116371586609265529&rtpof=true&sd=true) on the Decembrist Revolt, and [this essay](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uHta0HeZ8RTlK5QAnK9nqcn43I8rsobp/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=117116371586609265529&rtpof=true&sd=true) comparing Slavophile and socialist realist art. I think these capture why I decided to study languages pretty well: as someone who was (quite evidently) crazy about literature, history and art, but also had a good amount of experience with the largely technical enterprise that is getting to grips with grammar, I viewed a language degree as an opportunity to 'decode' a culture. If academic language study is an exercise in 'decoding', it is of course technical and systematic to some extent - but the difference is that instead of applying these technical, systemising skills to a formal/abstract system (like mathematics or a programming language), I was aiming to apply it to something intensely human.

Alas, it was not to be. I switched degree after a year of French and Russian to study Linguistics for my remaining two years at university, filled with disillusionment about how institutions teach languages (which may or may not have been a way to deflect responsibility for my utter incomprehension of Russian verbs of motion). But even though I switched subject, I was largely still looking for the same thing: a technically challenging field of study which was also related to human communication. My Linguistics degree has delivered on that front. While constantly explaining to interviewers and fellow students alike the (vast) difference between linguistics and literature has been a little soul-draining, no other subject would have allowed me to use lambda calculus to define adverbs, use Python to explore language typology (and become fairly competent at both), and carry out a dissertation which brought together formal syntax, machine learning and modelling neural plasticity. I believe this experience has given me a unique perspective on language teaching and learning, and plenty of ideas regarding how we can use language technology - and not just the usual NLP applications - to improve how we communicate with each other across languages.

I also made use of the mercifully low contact hours of the linguistics course to dabble in many other things: I did a bit of [student journalism](https://www.varsity.co.uk/profile/ashna-ahmad), a bit of [theatre](https://www.camdram.net/people/ashna-ahmad), and spent the majority of 2021 working in sales roles at SaaS startups alongside my degree. Sales provided me with excellent training in the concise yet engaging communication style which is rarely taught or rewarded by a university education. Above all, though, the chance to work alongside such motivated and passionate founders inspired me to believe that I too can make things to solve the problems I care about - and that is what I eventually plan to do.

Speaking of plans - here's the closest I could get to putting together an answer to the classic 'five-year plan' interview question:
* I have a conditional offer to study MSc Computing at Imperial College London in the 2022-23 academic year, and I'm also hoping to carry out a 3-month research project at the UCL Interaction Centre this summer, in the area of conversational AI. Beyond that, there are two main types of opportunities I'm looking for right now, and I'm very prepared to drop other plans if amazing opportunities in these areas come up:
  - Since I'm a soon-to-be computer science graduate student with considerable sales experience, I'd love to lend my combination of technical and sales skills to a startup or scaleup in need of Sales Engineers/Solutions Consultants. I have particular experience in NLP and bioinformatics technologies at the moment (as well as ML and data science more broadly), but would love to learn about more areas.
  - I would eventually like to pursue a PhD in human-computer interaction, focusing on the pedagogical potential of dialogue systems/conversational AI. I think my undergraduate background in computational linguistics and postgraduate study of computer science equips me especially well for this path. If I can use the results of my research to develop a product, that would be even better - but who's to say where this research will lead me?

If you've made it this far, do consider dropping me a line at aa2155@cam.ac.uk, on LinkedIn, or even on Discord (Aknietta#9535)! I always love talking to potential collaborators, or even just people who are doing cool stuff.
