---
title: Bilingual Language Processing
---

_Originally written in 2020. More like a lit review._

In the domains of both lexical and syntactic processing, L2 speakers’ potential for ‘native-like’ processing is a question of whether or not L2 speakers are able to acquire connections between lexical units/grammatical structures and concepts which have the same strength as those which characterise native language processing. A related question is whether processing units for all of a multilingual person’s languages exist within a common structure, within which, at least during initial stages of the process, all languages are _coactivated_. This would imply that all languages, native or otherwise, go through the same system – which would make achieving native-level processing simply a matter of optimising this system until it is equal to that of an L1 speaker.

In both areas, hypotheses exist which posit structurally different methods for accessing native and non-native language knowledge. According to the Revised Hierarchical Model (RHM), the L1 has privileged word-concept connections, whilst any L2 has equally strong connections between an L2 word and its L1 translation, but a much weaker connection to the concept itself. This implies an inherently different, ‘non-native’ quality to L2 processing. The Shallow Structure Hypothesis (SSH) implies a similarly qualitative difference in syntactic processing: while L1 speakers acquire a deep familiarity with the syntactic principles of the language in question, L2 speakers overvalue thematic rather than syntactic constraints in a way which fundamentally differs from how they would deal with their L1. This essay will examine supporting and opposing evidence for both of these models, with the aim of establishing whether either of them hold sufficiently to preclude L2 speakers from achieving ‘native-like’ processing.

The RHM first came about as a way of explaining an observed asymmetry between L1->2 and L2->1 translation processes: the latter has been found to be significantly faster and more accurate on average than the former (Dufour, Kroll and Talamas, 1999). The model’s initial proponents cite a study (Kroll and Stewart, 1994) which suggests that L1->2 translation is influenced significantly more by semantic context than the other direction, implying more conceptual mediation (in light of context) involved in the process. They go on to mention a picture naming study (Kroll, Sankaranarayanan and Sholl, 1995) which provides further evidence of stronger word-concept links in the L1. In this study, bilingual participants completed a picture-naming task (which included the same concepts) prior to their translation task. Picture-naming involves reinforcing the mental connection between a concept and its lexical representation. This reinforcement improved participants’ speed and accuracy when translating from L1 to L2, but _not_ in the other direction. The implication is that this word-concept link is only relevant for L1->2 translation, whereas for L2->L1, the process is a more straightforward, _qualitatively different_ operation of simply performing a lookup within the lexicon. This would also suggest that the L1 intervenes heavily in the word-concept connections for L2 lexical entries: one must ‘go through’ the L1 translation to reach the concept.

The body of the paper by Dufour, Kroll and Talamas deals with findings from a translation recognition task with English-Spanish bilingual subjects, of varying levels of Spanish proficiency. Subjects were asked to evaluate sets of translations which included a correct translation, a translation to an orthographically- or phonologically-related but incorrect word, a translation to a semantically-related but incorrect words, and unrelated form-related and semantically-related controls. As the RHM predicts, the less fluent L2 speakers’ judgements were more strongly affected by form-related distractors than semantically-related ones. There was a gradual, but not complete, shift towards greater distraction by semantically-related incorrect translations at higher levels of L2 proficiency. This goes at least some way towards substantiating the RHM hypothesis that L2 speakers replace conceptual mediation with lexical lookups (with which form-related distractors naturally interfere); even at higher levels of proficiency, this interference was visible. While this is far from conclusive evidence, since both form- and semantically-related distractors caused some degree of interference at all levels of proficiency, it does point to the involvement of a _non-native-like_ form of processing in L2 access, given that L1 processing is overwhelmingly conceptually mediated.

A study on L2 form-meaning mappings by Jiang (2002) arguably corroborates this suggestion of qualitative difference between L1 and L2 processing routes. The key idea is that even at higher proficiency levels, even after having succeeded at mapping from L1 _meaning_ to an L2 lexical entry (rather than from an L1 lexical entry), the L2 speaker’s understanding of meaning continues to be mediated by conceptual constraints imported from their L1. This study involved a semantic relatedness task performed by proficient Chinese-English bilinguals and a control group of native English speakers, and some of the pairs of English words which were to be evaluated on their semantic relatedness had the same translation in Chinese. Chinese L1 speakers provided a significantly higher relatedness rating for English pairs with the same Chinese translation than for other pairs, and these were also significantly higher than the ratings provided by English native speakers. Once again, this is not a perfect finding: the most obvious problem is that the Chinese L1 speakers did on average perceive some extent of semantic nuance in the pairs with the same Chinese translation, since they did not have a uniform average rating of 100% relatedness. However, it does hint that even proficient L2 speakers access word-concept connections via their L1. If this L1 interference is persistent even at higher proficiency levels, this indicates the difficulty – if not impossibility – of achieving native-like lexical processing, since this L1 intermediary will always necessarily have a slight influence.

However, current literature does not especially favour the RHM (Kroll, van Hell, Tokowicz and Green, 2010). The question of the extent of conceptual mediation in an L2 is complicated, and has been answered in various ways. One important finding concerns the representation of certain specific word categories in the bilingual memory: namely, concrete (or abstract) words and cognates. Concreteness/abstraction is a semantic distinction which is nonetheless well-represented in L2 processing; one series of experiments on Dutch-English bilinguals (De Groot and van Hell, 1998) found that both L1->2 and L2->1 translation was sensitive to this distinction. In particular, bilingual semantic relatedness judgements were more accurate for concrete words across both languages. This does intuitively make sense, since words representing abstract concepts are not attached to visible objects, and so are less well-defined and have more room for language-specific. De Groot and van Hell accounted for this by positing a ‘distributed memory representation’, wherein representations with shared conceptual features activate a set of common units which stand for these features; words in different languages can have common units for bilinguals, and words describing concrete concepts in different languages are more likely to have conceptual features in common. In general, though, the notion that L2 processing is sensitive to such a _semantic_ quality as concreteness poses problems for the RHM.

A separate but related question is that of cognates, which multiple studies (cf. De Groot and Van Hell, 1998 and Lemhoefer and Dijkstra, 2004) have shown to be more quickly recognisable by bilingual speakers than other words. Such studies have led to the conclusion that the coactivation of possibilities at the semantic level of representation occurs across languages. As was briefly mentioned earlier in this essay, coactivation implies the integration of both L1 and L2 processing within one broader system. This suggests that native-like processing _is_ attainable a priori for L2 speakers and is only a matter of route optimisation within this shared system (or in other words, the difference between L1 processing and \[most\] L2 processing is quantitative, not qualitative). Cross-linguistic coactivation is well-supported in psycholinguistic literature.

To give another example, a study by Blumenfeld and Marian (2007) measured eye-movement during a picture-matching task where German-English bilinguals were asked to select the picture corresponding to an English word (either a German-English cognate or an English-specific word). The picture selection contained pictures corresponding to phonologically-similar German words which would be considered competitors in an interactive model. By tracking which pictures the subjects looked at, the researchers were able to observe the activation of German words within an experiment conducted entirely in English – showing that even in a setting dominated by one language, bilinguals’ other language can be activated simultaneously, as part of the same overarching process. It has also been observed that written words in one language can activate orthographically similar words in a bilingual’s other language (Dijkstra and van Heuven, 1998). In the light of considerable evidence for coactivation and some examples of semantic sensitivity in L2s, it does not seem reasonable to consider L2 lexical processing part of an entirely separate system or route; given that the difference between L1 and L2 lexical processing is therefore primarily quantitative, it is theoretically possible for the latter to overcome many of these differences and become ‘native-like.’

In syntactic processing, the Shallow Structure Hypothesis has similar implications to the RHM: it posits a qualitative difference in L2 syntactic processing which makes it fundamentally ‘non-native-like.’ It states that bilinguals do not acquire a deep grasp of structural relations in their L2, and instead rely disproportionately on semantic information and on morphosyntactic information from their L1 to make judgements when using it. The SSH is, on the whole, better-substantiated than the RHM. ERP data from a study by Hahne and Friederici (2001) on native Japanese learners of German shows that semantic integration appears quite similar in L1 and L2 processing: in both L1 and L2 speakers, an amplitude modulation of the N400 component was observed in response to semantically incorrect senstences. The main difference was that the N400-effect lasted longer in L2 speakers, which may be a consequence of context-integration taking them comparatively longer. On the other hand, syntactic violations elicited very different responses from native and non-native speakers. There was little to no modulation in response from L2 speakers, while L1 speakers showed a clear P600 modulation, preceded by an anterior negativity effect. In response to co-occurrence of semantic and syntactic violations, L2 speakers seemed to process the violations primarily semantically, showing a right anterior-central negativity pattern which was not present in L1 speakers. Similar results have been found for Russian-German and French-German bilinguals. This is wholly consistent with the idea that L2 speakers are only able to engage in ‘shallow’ syntactical processing, and that they overuse semantic information to compensate for this shortcoming.

The idea of the L1 acting as an intermediary in syntactic processing, just as in lexical processing, is also raised by ERP studies. In one such study, novice L1 English, L2 French learners’ responses to grammatical violations were tracked over the course of a year on university language courses (McClaughlin et al, 2010). P600 as opposed to N400 modulation in response was related to better behavioural performance, and was also exhibited in the native French-speaking control group. The study found that violations involving concepts which also existed in English (e.g. verb agreement) elicited P600 responses after only a few weeks, whereas violations of concepts without English analogues (e.g. determiner-noun agreement) did not elicit native-like P600 responses even after a full year of instruction. Of course, the problem with this study is that it did not track language learners over a longer period of time to observe whether a native-like response is eventually achieved – but it still shows the enormous relative difficulty of assimilating L2 grammatical concepts which lack L1 analogues, and thus the interfering effect of the L1 as an intermediary. This effect could be viewed as a qualitative difference between L1 and L2 processing.

Some other research, however, suggests that this effect can diminish greatly. Kim, Montrul and Yoon (2015) looked at L1 Korean, L2 English learners’ acquisition of binding principles in English. As expected, lower proficiency learners took longer to resolve anaphoric dependencies (for example) and were more likely to make direct transfers from L1 knowledge in ambiguous cases. But the more surprising finding from this study is that the advanced speakers processed syntax in a reasonably ‘native-like’ way: they were about as fast as natives to resolve anaphoric dependencies, and although they had significantly more difficulty interpreting pronouns than reflexives, this is also the case for native speakers. The authors concluded that “it may be difficult to argue that there is a qualitative difference between learners and natives in the pattern of moment-by-moment parsing. L2 learners \[…\] do seem to engage in incremental parsing in a way that is largely similar to native speakers.” Other studies which have focused on very proficient L2 speakers, often in situations of immersion, have found similar patterns in advanced L2 morphosyntactic parsing; one study with advanced Spanish-English bilingual subjects (Gillon-Dowens et al, 2004) found that several morphosyntactic features including number agreement were processed in an L1-like way.

Observations of highly proficient L2 speakers imply that while there are very tangible obstacles to processing syntax in a native-like way and detaching from L1 influence for beginner learners, these can be overcome. As with lexical processing, this indicates a primarily quantitative rather than qualitative difference between L1 and L2 syntactic processing. We can conclude, therefore, that it _is_ possible (albeit difficult) for L2 language processing to become ‘native-like.’

Works Cited

Blumenfeld, H. K., & Marian, V. (2007). Constraints on parallel activation in bilingual spoken language processing: Examining proficiency and lexical status using eye-tracking. _Language and cognitive processes_, 22(5), 633-660.

Gillon-Dowens, M., Barber, H., Vergara, M., & Carreiras, M. (2004, September). Does practice make perfect? An ERP study of morphosyntactic processing in highly proficient English–Spanish late bilinguals. In _10th Annual Conference on Architectures and Mechanisms for Language Processing (AMLaP)._

Hahne, A., & Friederici, A. D. (2001). Processing a second language: Late learners’ comprehension mechanisms as revealed by event-related brain potentials. _Bilingualism: Language and Cognition_, 4(2), 123-141.

Jiang, N. (2002). Form-meaning mapping in vocabulary acquisition in a second language. _Studies in Second Language Acquisition_, 617-637.

Kim, E., Montrul, S., & Yoon, J. (2015). The on-line processing of binding principles in second language acquisition: Evidence from eye tracking. _Applied Psycholinguistics_, 36(6), 1317-1374.

Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric connections between bilingual memory representations. _Journal of memory and language_, 33(2), 149.

Kroll, J. F., van Hell, J. G., Tokowicz, N., & Green, D. W. (2010). The Revised Hierarchical Model: A critical review and assessment. _Bilingualism_, 13(3), 373–381.

Lemhöfer, K., & Dijkstra, T. (2004). Recognizing cognates and interlingual homographs: Effects of code similarity in language-specific and generalized lexical decision. _Memory & Cognition_, 32(4), 533-550.

McLaughlin, J., Tanner, D., Pitkänen, I., Frenck‐Mestre, C., Inoue, K., Valentine, G., & Osterhout, L. (2010). Brain potentials reveal discrete stages of L2 grammatical learning. _Language Learning_, 60, 123-150.

Sholl, A., Sankaranarayanan, A., & Kroll, J. F. (1995). Transfer between picture naming and translation: A test of asymmetries in bilingual memory. _Psychological science_, 6(1), 45-49.

Talamas, A., Kroll, J. F., & Dufour, R. (1999). From form to meaning: Stages in the acquisition of second-language vocabulary. _Bilingualism: Language and Cognition_, 2(1), 45-58.

Van Hell, J. G., & De Groot, A. M. (1998). Conceptual representation in bilingual memory: Effects of concreteness and cognate status in word association. _Bilingualism: Language and Cognition_, 1(3), 193-211.

Van Heuven, W. J., Dijkstra, T., & Grainger, J. (1998). Orthographic neighborhood effects in bilingual word recognition. _Journal of memory and language_, 39(3), 458-483.