---
title: The Other Russian Revolution
---

_Written - as you can probably guess - in 2017._

This year, all eyes are on Russia. It is rather fitting that, as the year of the centenaries of its two most famous revolutions began, the country was all over the news once again, this time for allegedly interfering in the American presidential election. As talks concerning the situation in the Middle East continue and the conflict in Ukraine rages on, not to mention the unfolding of Trump’s presidency and the effect of his drastically different outlook on Russia, 2017 may even rival its century-earlier counterpart in terms of its significance for Russia and the rest of the world.

But 1917 was not the only year in which the world’s largest country underwent a definitive transformation. There is reason to believe that the Russian national character, relationships with other countries and position on the world stage we see today started to take shape long before then. Official Soviet historiography presented the October Revolution as the single event during which the “logically predetermined” destiny of not only what was to become the Soviet Union, but of human society in its entirety, was realised.[1](#fn:1) While the West is generally sceptical of such historical determinism and of positive portrayals of the revolution, the Western and Soviet interpretations converge in one key way: both give the revolution prime position as a crucial turning point in the making of Russia. However, another, often overlooked revolution is a contender for this position. This revolution, taking place on a snow-muffled square in St. Petersburg in the otherwise unglamorous year of 1825, was not a barricade-building, flag-hoisting, jubilant triumph of liberty over tyranny. On the contrary, it was a disorganised mess which failed risibly. Its most immediately visible result was inspiring the new Tsar, Nicholas I, to tighten censorship and crack down ever more harshly on dissent.

Known as the Decembrist Revolt, the revolution in question was not an average ‘turning point revolution’ – but Russia was not an average country. Arguably, any country spanning such a large area and comprising a correspondingly wide variety of cultures, nations and geographical influences is bound to struggle with its national identity at some point, and in 1825, this was exactly what the Russian Empire was doing. At this point, the country was ostensibly in a rather strong position. Over a century after Peter the Great expressed and took the first steps towards the aim of reorganising the Empire based on a ‘European’ model (chiefly in the cultural and military[2](#fn:2) spheres), his great- great-grandson, Alexander I, made it a recognised European power after cementing Napoleon’s defeat in the Russian Campaign of 1812.

Due to this significant victory, Alexander I’s government played an instrumental role in dividing up post-Napoleonic Europe at the Vienna Congress and gained considerable influence on the continent.[3](#fn:3) Even before Napoleon’s defeat, Russia had been pursuing heavily expansionist foreign policy, most notably under the ‘enlightened despot’ Catherine the Great, who sought to extend her influence over the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Black Sea region[4](#fn:4) while professing her adherence to European Enlightenment ideals.[5](#fn:5) But in spite of its deceptively strong, modernising appearance, the country’s problems ran deep. While Western and Central European countries embraced industrial capitalism and improved their armed forces and political statuses with the

consequent growth, serfdom and reluctance to implement much-needed reforms held back their Eastern neighbour.[6](#fn:6) From here, Russia had three potential paths. It could have actualised Peter I & Catherine II’s progressive rhetoric and enacted the reforms needed to trim its bureaucracy and become a modern, European nation. It could have retreated into the isolation it experienced for much of the pre-Enlightenment period, remaining feudal, autocratic and reactionary in outlook. Or it could have remained mired in this identity crisis, forever switching between reform and reaction. Of course, no one event can completely shape a country’s future – but December 26th, 1825, represents when Russia’s path started to become clear.

The revolt began after, once Alexander I died, his brothers (and the potential heirs) pledged allegiance to each other. A confused interregnum followed, during which it became apparent that the deceased Tsar had named the future Nicholas I heir presumptive, having bypassed Nicholas’ older brother Konstantin after he renounced the throne and married a Polish woman of non-noble birth. Although Konstantin had been a heavy-handed ruler in Poland and his credentials as a reformer remain unclear, the Decembrists openly advocated peasant emancipation and constitutional monarchy[7](#fn:7) and evidently swore allegiance to him because they believed that he was sufficiently liberal and was the rightful heir.

Despite their liberal aims, the Decembrists did not hail from typically progressive social strata.The crowd which assembled at Senate Square on December 26th, 1825, to swear allegiance to Konstantin

and to the Decembrist Constitution were mostly officers of noble backgrounds. The appointed leader of the group, Sergei Trubetskoy, was the son of a Georgian Princess and formerly part of the Semyonovsky regiment which fought against Napoleon, while the author of its official charter, Pavel Pestel, was the son of the notoriously corrupt governor-general of Siberia and was a colonel in the Viatsky regiment.[8](#fn:8) More unusual still were the group’s ties to freemasonry; the Union of Prosperity had a masonic structure and was distinctly Christian, but was still inspired by liberals and French revolutionaries, right down to their clothing. This Union spearheaded the revolt, along with regimental leaders whom they convinced to join them in order to increase numbers.

In the end, though, their efforts to increase numbers were fruitless. On the day of the revolt, 3,000 officers gathered at Senate Square in St. Petersburg to protest, though the other troops in St. Petersburg who were supposed to join the revolt made no appearance. Trubetskoy was also absent, as was his second-in-command. Following several hours of deadlock, the general Mikhail Miloradovich was shot and stabbed to death while attempting to reach an agreement with the rebels. After that, Nicholas I concluded that the standoff could not be brought to a peaceful end and ordered cannons to open fire on the rebels. One failed attack on the Winter Palace and one regroupment quashed by artillery fire later, the revolt ended in dismal failure, with 1,721 dead in all. The chronic disorganisation of the rebels led to the revolution effort completely collapsing.[9](#fn:9)

Not only was the immediate result of the uprising the opposite to what one would expect of a revolution of significance; the uprising is widely credited as the main cause for Nicholas I’s suspicion of liberals[10](#fn:10) and thus its main effect was actually to hold back reforms in Russia. Instead of accelerating the progression towards modern liberal democracy, as some other influential European revolutions (against which Nicholas I was keen to act as a bulwark of reaction) did this century, this revolution consigned Russia to a state of ideologically-motivated reaction which has never really gone away. The decades immediately after the revolution were decades of resigned compliance for liberals. To counter the threat of liberalism, the Tsar’s education minister, Sergei Uvarov, was tasked with coming up with a doctrinal or ideological basis for Russian education policy, which soon became the state mantra “Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality.”[11](#fn:11) This is of importance in that it showed Nicholas I’s push towards greater ‘Russification’, emphasising the Russian language, religion and ’natural’ style of government, and thus a move away from the Europeanism cultivated by Peter the Great and certain successors of his.

However, there is more nuance to this situation. After Nicholas I reacted decidedly against Europeanism and liberalism by implementing a firmly conservative state ideology, Russia did not remain to this day a country defined by “Orthodoxy, Autocracy and Nationality.” In fact, the next Tsar, Alexander II, was best-known for finally emancipating the serfs in 1861 and, had he not been assassinated, would have signed a set of reforms aimed at giving Russia a constitution.[12](#fn:12) Alexander III, who succeeded him, aborted the reforms and led Russia in a more autocratic manner once more; only to have his efforts at re-establishing a stable autocracy sabotaged by Nicholas II, who was forced to yield to his angry subjects after the 1905 revolution and grant them a Parliament and constitution. Soon afterwards, of course, were the substantially more famous revolutions of 1917. A full discussion of the liberal and reactionary trends in the Soviet Union would require a whole other essay, but in short, the vacillation between a suppressive, highly centralised political and economic culture (existent under Stalin and, to a lesser degree, under Brezhnev’s re-centralisation programme) and something resembling attempts at _glasnost’_ (or similar policies or lip service, such as Khrushchev’s Thaw) seems to mirror the vacillation between semi-liberalism and autocracy under the Russian Empire in the decades after the Decembrist Revolt.

Even in modern Russia, this familiar pattern continues. After Yeltsin appeared to envisage a modern, open Russia as the future, Putin has embraced anti-West, stubborn autocratic policy and put a nail in the coffin of the notion that 21st-century Russia could become a Western-style democracy. The outward appearance of modern Russia is often one of strength; as the Western order seems to be disintegrating after the populist onslaught and politicians like Trump and Fillon openly praise Putin’s leadership, one would be forgiven for thinking that Russia is remarkably stable and self-assured in comparison with countries like the United States. Yet the legacy of the Decembrist Revolt suggests otherwise. It seems evident, judging by Russian history ever since the revolt, that Russia chose the last of the three paths: the path of perpetual identity crisis, caused by the cautiousness of Russian liberals and the fear of liberalism which the country seems to have had ever since Nicholas I first cracked down on them in 1826. Every time anyone tries to reach out tentatively towards a more liberal future, the attempt is retracted; and yet, Russia does not have enough conviction in its autocratic spirit to last a considerable amount of time without such an attempt. At base, in spite of all pretensions to the country, the Russian Federation of 2017 is fundamentally unsure of itself.

* * *

1.  Edward Acton, _Critical Companion to the Russian Revolution, 1914–1921_ (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997) [↩︎](#fnref:1)
    
2.  Evgenii V. Anisimov, _The Reforms of Peter the Great: Progress Through Violence in Russia_ (Routledge, 2015) [↩︎](#fnref:2)
    
3.  Adam Zamoyski, _Rites of Peace: The Fall of Napoleon and the Congress of Vienna_ (Harper Perennial, 2008) [↩︎](#fnref:3)
    
4.  Nicholas V. Riasanovsky and Mark D. Steinberg, _A History of Russia_ (Oxford University Press, 8th edition, 2010) [↩︎](#fnref:4)
    
5.  Ibid. [↩︎](#fnref:5)
    
6.  Riasanovsky and Steinberg, op. cit. [↩︎](#fnref:6)
    
7.  Anatole Gregory Mazour, _The first Russian revolution, 1825: the Decembrist movement, its origins, development, and significance_ (Stanford University Press, 1961) [↩︎](#fnref:7)
    
8.  Ibid. [↩︎](#fnref:8)
    
9.  Ibid. [↩︎](#fnref:9)
    
10.  Riasanovsky, _Nicholas I and Official Nationality in Russia, 1825-1855_ (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1959) [↩︎](#fnref:10)
    
11.  Riasanovsky, ““Nationality” in the State Ideology during the Reign of Nicholas I”, _The Russian Review_ 19, no.1 (1960) [↩︎](#fnref:11)
    
12.  Werner Mosse, _Alexander II and the Modernization of Russia_ (NY: Collier, 1962) [↩︎](#fnref:12)