---
title: Power Dynamics and Sexuality
---

_An essay originally written for an exam in 2018, on _Lolita_ and _The Bloody Chamber._ For an exam essay, I am unreasonably proud of this one. (Apparently it also marks my discovery of MLA?)_

“In a good short story”, wrote Greg Hollingshead in 1999, “the meaning is not so abstractable, so portable, as it must be in a novel, but is rather more tightly and ineffably embodied in the formal details of the text.” (Hollingshead 878) A scene in a short story operates with “centripetal force”: self- contained, focused inwards, seeking to embody within every detail of its constituent text the meaning its author wishes to convey. In contrast, the energy of a scene in a novel is centrifugal. There is a qualitative difference between a line of short stories strung together and a novel, in that each scene in a novel must look forward and backwards, connecting antecedents to consequents, leading up to and concluding its climax rather than _being_ that climax.

This difference in form clearly manifests itself in the presentation of power dynamics within sexuality by Nabokov and Carter. Carter has affirmed her fondness of “Gothic tales, cruel tales, tales of wonder, tales of terror \[…\] mirrors; the externalized self; forsaken castles; haunted forests; forbidden sexual objects” (Wisker 178), and many of these elements can be seen in _The Bloody Chamber_, which can therefore be read as a Gothic tale; a tale deliberately constructed to provoke terror (Farima 1). The genre to which _Lolita_ belongs has a far less defined purpose; McHale characterises it as “the last of Nabokov’s modernist novels” (McHale 90), being organised according to “an epistemological dominant” as opposed to an ontological one. True to the modernist canon, the unreliability of Humbert Humbert as a narrator and his eloquent and beguiling use of language leave the reader facing a conundrum over how to react to him: whether to sympathise with his somehow appealing character or be disgusted by the obvious repugnance of his actions. Consequently, while both power dynamics presented begin with a similar outline – virile, powerful older man sexually attracted to innocent, virginal younger girl – _The Bloody Chamber’s_ self-containment as a short story lends itself well to the Gothic objective of raw horror, while _Lolita_, a novel, creates a more subtle, less decisive sense of unease in the reader’s mind.

One of the most immediately noticeable aspects of this similarity in outline is the commonalities between the two dominant male characters’ sexual tastes, and their connection to certain aspects of the characters’ personalities. From the outset, Humbert is portrayed to the reader as attractive, sophisticated and, above all, masculine: “Let me repeat with quiet force: I was, and still am, despite mes malheurs, an exceptionally handsome male \[…\] Exceptional virility often reflects in the subject’s displayable features a sullen and congested something that pertains to what he has to conceal.” (Nabokov 25) The very way he expresses these traits of his reaffirms his possession of them, from the imperative “let me repeat” and the association of quiet force with the ‘strong and silent’ male ideal, to the exotic sprinkling of mysterious French words (“mes malheurs”), to the brooding intelligence insinuated by the generalisation “the subject’s displayable features.”

In the same vein, the Marquis is so masculine as to be “leonine”, and the narrator takes care to describe the characteristics which contribute to his dominance over her. The idea that “though he was a big man, he moved as softly \[…\] as if his footfall turned the carpet into snow” (Carter 2) simultaneously highlights his masculine proportions and the almost magical quality of his mystique, demonstrated by a simile describing an act of transfiguration, while the pairing of a repeated comparative and an intensifier (“He was older than I. He was much older than I,”) explicitly relate his age to his power over the narrator, i.e. his ‘more-than’ relative to her. She wonders why he chose her and speculates that “as if to demonstrate the eclecticism of his taste, he had invited me to join this gallery of beautiful women” (3) using the connotations of variety and plentitude supplied by “gallery” and the freedom of an invitation to communicate his utter control over the matter. Humbert has just as much freedom to choose who he has sex with; women risk “toppling, bloodripe, into \[his\] cold lap.” (Nabokov 25) “Toppling” suggests an involuntary action, just as “cold” implies unwillingness; the mutual unwillingness emphasised by this counterposition shows that Humbert attracts women with not just minimal, but negative effort. Thus both men are masculine, mysterious and entirely in control sexually.

The absolute dominance resulting from these traits makes these men’s desires for particularly vulnerable women more striking examples of a sexual preference for acting as subjugator. To an extent, both Nabokov and Carter could be argued to have expressly depicted sadomasochistic relationships, in which at least one partner gains sexual satisfaction from being on one side of an evident power imbalance. This depiction may not have been entirely conscious since not much was publicly known at the time of writing about such preferences. However, the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual formally established the link between sadomasochism and infantilism, stating that one party in a sadomasochistic relationship may “be treated as a helpless infant” (DSM-IV 572) as an additional dimension to the power dynamic. The modern reader may therefore interpret the texts with this context in mind.

In _Lolita_, of course, even infantilised adults – Valeria with her way of dressing “à la gamine” (girlishly)[1](#fn:1) (Nabokov 26) or Rita with “the oddly prepubescent curve of her back” (257) - do not satisfy Humbert’s lust for children themselves. Every facet of Lolita’s prepubescence stirs passion in him; throughout the novel, he uses epithets which accentuate various aspects of her youth, for instance “brown, naked, frail Lo” (137), “little limp Lo!” (157) and “my little concubine who was now sixty inches tall and weighed ninety pounds” (206). In the first example, a tricolon of adjectives all linked to exposure and (hence) vulnerability reinforce each other’s messages; in the second, the alliteration of sensual lateral consonants emphasises Humbert’s delight in playing with the sound of Lolita’s name (and thus the very notion of her). By mentioning Lolita’s height and weight in the third example, he draws attention to the physically diminutive stature which complements her mental youth, which is emphasised once more by the word “little”, rendered sexual when coupled with “concubine.” In ancient Rome, _concubini_ were child slaves sexually abused by their masters; this historical significance adds to the exploitative implications of this word choice.

Though _The Bloody Chamber_ does not go as far as overt paedophilia, the Marquis does display paraphilic traits through his fetishisation of the narrator’s youth and innocence, which is even conveyed using epithets resembling Humbert’s. He addresses her as “my little nun”, proceeding to comment mockingly “Baby musn’t play with grown-ups’ toys until she has learnt how to handle them, musn’t she?” (Carter 6) Whereas Nabokov juxtaposes “little” with the sexual connotations of “councubine”, Carter does the opposite by attributing the adjective to “nun”, a word which contrastingly hints at pudicity. Pudicity is still semantically connected to sexuality, in that it is the denial of overt sexuality, but can still be seen as a sexually desirable attribute for women (and has been seen as such in many societies). Thus despite using essentially an antonym of ‘concubine’, Carter retains a similar link between ‘littleness’ and sexuality. Indeed, the entirety of _The Bloody Chamber_ arguably fits into this pattern of exposing the hidden, frequently forgotten sexual elements within certain ideas. Bacchilega writes that “Carter turned to the fairy tale, because of its latent sexuality, in order to lure – rather than force – women into reassessing our relationship to sexuality.” (Bacchilega 18). Just as the common trope of the innocent, younger woman with “a potentiality for corruption” (Carter 3) has sexual, even sadomasochistic undertones, so does the genre of the fairy tale itself, and Carter uses these choices of trope and genre to bring these latent undertones to the forefront of her narrative.

Alongside the idea of childishness is that of inexperience, either in the general sense of a lack of knowledge caused by a lack of life experience, or sexual inexperience – i.e. virginity – more specifically. The Marquis appears to relish the idea that certain things are out of reach to the narrator of _The Bloody Chamber_, whether this be physically out of reach, due to her childlike proportions, or incomprehensible to her childlike mind. Without using quotations or otherwise indicating that these are the Marquis’ thoughts, Carter writes “I \[the narrator\] was only a little girl, I did not understand.” (6) The fact that there is no such indication suggests that the narrator is indeed in a position of incomprehension, as she has seamlessly absorbed the thoughts of the Marquis such that they have become her own; the force of his authority has altered her view of herself after just one night spent with him. This highlights just how much control he has over her mind without her even recognising his exercise of control. His mockery exemplifies this once again: “he dangled the key tantalizingly above my head, out of reach of my straining fingers.” (7) _Straining_, a present participle implying continuous, considerable effort, means that the narrator is in fact trying hard to attain something which the Marquis is placing out of her reach; in other words, this is a small act of rebellion. Nevertheless, he is deliberately entertaining this rebellion and “tantalising” her in a continuous manner to match her straining. That he is enjoying the futility of her rebellion shows his active enjoyment of his power over her and his ability to prevent her action from coming to fruition.

Humbert likewise enjoys Lolita’s inexperience and his own ability to tame any rebellion she might attempt; he describes her “lovely, lost, inane look” (Nabokov 75), again using the alliteration of lateral consonants, and like the Marquis, he describes even her most exasperating behaviour tenderly. By noting that “a combination of naivete and deception, of charm and vulgarity, of blue sulks and rosy mirth, Lolita…could be a most exasperating brat” (145), he juxtaposes ‘charm’ and ‘rosiness’, words associated with youthful beauty, with her brattish behaviour, thereby connecting them almost causally in the mind of the reader. Although Lolita can be a brat, he sees this as directly related to her most endearing qualities, and even to her innocence. As is typical of sexually dominant partners, he appears to like watching _his_ Lolita struggle helplessly against his control.

However, the clearest instances of both female characters’ inexperience contributing to both power imbalances presented by these authors involve the taking of their virginity. In both cases, the taking of virginity is defilement; it is carnal consumption, and the two dominant men are the consumers. This is not unusual given the well-established English literary tradition of portraying virginity as “something for sole possession” and its loss as “personal destruction” (Chen 89), but these particular portrayals of virginity as such are integral to the power dynamics established by Nabokov and Carter. Humbert and the Marquis both use gustatory language to refer to the defilement of their virgin lovers. The former refers to “her innocent mouth melting under the ferocious pressure of dark male jaws” (Nabokov 66), using the notions of melting and pressure applied by jaws to liken his discreet sexual advances to the consumption of food, and establishing himself using synecdoche as the supremely masculine owner of the “dark male jaws.” He later uses the verb “gorge” (“gorge the limp nymphet” (80)), which has similar connotations of consumption, coupling it with a reference to the “limp”, helpless object of this verb.

The Marquis’ use of language in this gustatory semantic field also has the purpose of illustrating his power over and dehumanisation – hence “personal destruction” - of the object of his consumption. “He stripped me, gourmand that he was, as if he were stripping the leaves off an artichoke–but do not imagine much finesse about it; this artichoke was no particular treat for the diner nor was he yet in any greedy haste” (Carter 5) suggests a certain vulgarity through the crude term “stripped” and the overtly mentioned lack of finesse, as if he is roughly cutting her up as he would a vegetable. The juxtaposition of “gourmand”, implying luxury, and “stripped”, implying crudeness, renders this description slightly ironic.

Nabokov conveys the destruction inherent to a girl’s ‘deflowering’ using a sort of praeteritio; when Humbert takes Lolita’s virginity, he deliberately avoids explicit reference to any carnality and uses spiritually-toned language to give the impression of distance from such things. “I am not concerned

with _so_\-called sex at all \[…\] A great endeavour lures me on: to fix once and for all the perilous magic of nymphets,” (Nabokov 133), with words reminiscent of fantasy such as “endeavour”, “lure”, “perilous” and “magic”, creates the sense that Humbert desires the exact opposite of mere bodily pleasures; on the contrary, he is on a great quest bordering on the immaterial and magical. The concept of “fixing once and for all” roots this quest firmly in the power dynamic he seeks to establish, since it has a sense of finality – the final quashing of any resistance - and could be applied to an object rather than a person. Hence through the loss of her virginity, Lolita ceases to exist as a person and becomes purely Humbert’s nymphet: an object defined by its sexual employment.

Although the pure carnality of Carter’s style contrasts sharply with this, Carter ultimately creates a similar impression of the Marquis’ wish to crush the submissive party’s resistance, and her personhood. This is hinted at by the way in which the narrator almost seems to have an out-of-body experience as her virginity is taken, slipping into third person: “A dozen husbands impaled a dozen brides while the mewing gulls swung on invisible trapezes in the empty air outside.” (Carter 6) The violence of the verb “impale” paired with the surreal notions of invisible trapezes and husbands and wives ‘multiplying’ creates the idea that the narrator has been violently jerked out of her person and transformed into something less real: a spectacle which she is forced to watch from a third person perspective. This is compounded by her remark “Yet I had been infinitely dishevelled by the loss of my virginity”, which befits the idea that the loss of virginity constitutes defilement, and that hers was taken in a coarse, rough, destructive manner. Unlike Humbert, however, the narrator of _The Bloody Chamber_ makes no secret of the physical violence implicated in this defilement. For her, it is a crucial part of the act, not just banality that “anyone can imagine.” (Nabokov 133) Humbert’s use of an indefinite pronoun implies his own personal dissociation from the act; a dissociation which would be unlikely to exist if the novel were narrated, as _The Bloody Chamber_ is, by the victim of the violence.

A final similarity between the power dynamics presented by Nabokov and Carter is the ‘artistic’ qualities of both Humbert’s and the Marquis’ lust for their young lovers. These men are both aesthetes, for whom sexual pleasure is in part derived from the artistic form with which it is _presented_. In the mid to late 20th century, when both works were written, French was the language of high culture and diplomacy. English only became an official language of the European Economic Community in 1973 (just 6 years before _The Bloody Chamber_ was published), and so at the time of writing, English had not yet supplanted French as the language of the cultured global elite in the eyes of Europeans. Therefore the Frenchisms adorning the speech of both male characters enhance their portrayal as aesthetes. The Marquis intones “Your thin white face, _chérie._ Your thin white face…” (Carter 7), where the French apostrophe adds to the rhythmic, poetic impression provided by the anaphora, associating the apostrophised narrator with culture and art.

Humbert speaks similarly on several occasons throughout _Lolita_, but perhaps the most noteworthy instance is “Poor Bluebeard. Those brutal brothers. _Est-ce que tu ne m’aimes plus, ma Carmen_ ?”[2](#fn:2) (Nabokov 241) As well as a French epithet, rendered proprietorial by the possessive pronoun _ma_, Humbert refers to two artworks here: the opera and novella _Carmen_ and, remarkably, the French folk story _Bluebeard -_ of which _The Bloody Chamber_ is a retelling. By invoking art and relating the romance of Humbert and Lolita to it, Nabokov distances their romance one step further from reality; Humbert’s attraction to Lolita is hence no longer the sexual exploitation of a minor, but the abstract enjoyment of an aesthetic ideal.\*

This contrasts greatly with the aforementioned raw violence involved when the narrator of _The Bloody Chamber_ is _impaled_ as her virginity is taken. Like Lolita, she is reduced to an “image” within the artistic paradigm in which the Marquis conceptualises her. “I saw in the mirror the living image of an etching by Rops he had shown me” (Carter 5) suggests that his own artistic tastes, which she has become acquainted with, are informing and redefining her view of herself (with the mirror here symbolising her sense of self). Yet this reduction does not lessen the materiality of the sexual violence inflicted upon her. On the contrary, the pornographic attributes of every piece of art mentioned in _The Bloody Chamber_ – from Rops’ art, commonly associated with the most lascivious of proto-Symbolist poetry (Holtzmann 103), to books with such euphemistic titles as “_The Initiation, The Key of Mysteries, The Secret of Pandora’s Box”_ (Carter 5) - lead to a sense that the Marquis’ specific aesthetic ideal is vulgar and corrupt. Rather than using aesthetic concepts to ‘immaterialise’ the submissive party and draw attention away from the morally problematic aspect of their relationship, Carter uses them to further highlight the Marquis’ corruption and destruction of the narrator and her personhood. Her transformation into an image does not augment her being, as it does for Lolita, whose “Botticellian pink” aesthetic (Nabokov 64) immortalises her as “the eternal Lolita” (65); it diminishes it. The reader is not to pity the Bluebeard of _The Bloody Chamber_; this Bluebeard is not tortured by an immortal, nymphoid beauty.\*

We can already see from the different ways in which Carter and Nabokov use the idea of aesthetic pleasure that a pattern concerning the nature of the female characters’ subjugation is emerging. Even though Humbert is in a position of power over Lolita, as has been established in this essay, the high artistic esteem in which he holds her elevates her status such that he is perhaps not the only party exercising power in his relationship with her. An intriguing Freudian interpretation arises from this observation. As well as infantilising Lolita while simultaneously elevating her through her representation as a pictorial, quasi-immortal ideal, Humbert appears to infantilise _himself._ Blum writes that the term “adult disguise \[…\] describes simultaneously the adult façade veiling the child and his obsession with the world of girlchildren disguising the adult he is” (Blum 243), hinting that Humbert views himself as a child disguised as an adult, whose true desires are correspondingly those of a child.

This would lend weight to a reading of Humbert as inverse-Oedipal figure: an adult who never conquered his Oedipus complex and therefore, paradoxically, construes Lolita as the ‘mother’ and her mother Charlotte as the ‘father’ who must be removed in order for Oedipus-Humbert to be the sole object of Lolita’s desire. When Charlotte dies, Humbert refers to “when Charlotte had been eliminated and I re-entered the house a free father” (Nabokov 101); the clinical tone of “eliminated” implies that Humbert had a strategic interest in Charlotte’s death, just as an Oedipal character would strategically plan for the death of his father. The ironic mention of Humbert’s own status as father possibly shows that Nabokov has intentionally inverted the Oedipus complex to apply it to a perversely juvenile adult. This inversion also highlights one respect in which Lolita, as the ‘mother’ in this triad, exercises power over him.

For the majority of the novel, Humbert views love solipsistically. Near the start, he is always at the spatial centre of his relationships with nymphets; he declares “Let them play around me forever” (21), expressing his desire for nymphets to revolve physically around him, just as they would mentally do so. As the novel progresses, he continues to conceive of his attraction to nymphets in terms of the reaction they elicit in him; he generalises “that is what nymphets imitate, while we moan and die” (120). Only at the end does it become clear that he regrets his romantic solipsism, because contrary to previous impressions the reader may have received, he cares deeply about Lolita. Condemning himself, he almost seems to cry “I was despicable and brutal, and turpid, and everything, _mais je t’aimais, je t’aimais_ !” (283) This polysyndeton intensifies his self-condemnation and the impression that he is rapidly losing self-control, while the repetition of _je t’aimais_ and the use of the French imperfect add the sentimentality of a native tongue to an expression which already conveys profound, continuous, grievous love. The final sentence of the novel - “And this is the only immortality you and I may share, my Lolita” (307) - addresses Lolita using a possessive pronoun, as Humbert has done many times, but with added tenderness as the reader knows that the pair is irrevocably separated by death. The sincerity of Humbert’s love for Lolita is another way in which, despite his dominant attributes, she has power over him.

_The Bloody Chamber_ is not devoid of tender moments. The point at which the narrator first notices the Marquis’ tinge of vulnerability has such gravity that it is placed on its own line: “And it seemed to me that he was in despair.” (Carter 14) This is a fragment, beginning with “and”, showing that his appearance of despair is not a complete thought as a sentence proper would be; it is contingent. Even when considering the Marquis’ despair, there is an “and”, a shadow of the threat the Marquis always poses. Like Humbert, he apostrophises her using a term of endearment: “‘My little love, you’ll never know how much I hate daylight!" (14) Yet he returns to himself, to his hatred. There is no hint that he laments his neglect to focus on any component of the narrator’s personhood; she is never anything more to him than “virgin of the arpeggios”, an aesthetic ideal, a placeholder for “a dozen more fiancees.” (15) Most significantly, he wants to destroy her. The tricolon “the lustratory ritual and the ceremonial robing: after that, the sacrifice” (15), with the definite article giving an abstract sense to these processes, shows that the Marquis’ aesthetically-motivated idealism – so like Humbert’s, save for its mechanical, ritualistic, wholly destructive end product – follows him to his deathbed practically unchanged. To paraphrase Carter, his character is not altered by experience, but “washed perfectly smooth.”

This is the essential difference between a modernist novel and a Gothic short story. The former has the room, both in terms of its physical length and the necessarily much looser confines of its genre, for the author to add several layers of complexity to how he presents power dynamics within sexuality. A character who at first appears to have absolute dominance can be reduced to ceaseless outpourings of sorrow by a prepubescent orphan, because neither his dominance nor her fragility are absolute; it is the job of the modernist author to invite the reader to consider the fluid, symbiotic power dynamic between these two characters, and to question where their own sympathies lie. To write a Gothic short story, while the author may engage in social commentary, her ultimate purpose is to induce fear. The dominant male figure may have complex and conflicting emotions beneath his imposing exterior, but he may never yield. A character who yields is not fearsome. For this reason, unlike Nabokov’s counterpart, the dominant/submissive power dynamic established by Carter never wavers.

Works Cited

Bacchilega, Cristina. “Preface to the Special Issue on Erotic Tales.” _Marvels & Tales_, vol. 22, no. 1, 2008, pp. 13–23. JSTOR, [www.jstor.org/stable/41388855](https://www.jstor.org/stable/41388855)

Blum, Virginia L. _Hide and Seek: The Child between Psychoanalysis and Fiction._ University of Illinois Press, 1995.

Carter, Angela. _The Bloody Chamber._ Dudley House, Harvard University. Web. Accessed 31 October 2018. [https://dudley.harvard.edu/files/dudley/files/the\\\_bloody\\\_chamber.pdf](https://dudley.harvard.edu/files/dudley/files/the%5C_bloody%5C_chamber.pdf)

Chen, Kuo-Jung. “The Concept of Virginity and Its Representations in Eighteenth-Century English Literature.” 文山評論\*:\* 文學與文化\*,\* vol 3, no. 2, 2010, pp. 75-96. DOI: 10.30395/WSR

_Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,_ 4th ed: DSM-IV. American Psychiatric Association, 1994.

Farima, Marina. _The Uses of the Gothic in “The Bloody Chamber_.” University of Gothenburg. Web. Accessed 31 October 2018. [https://www.academia.edu/8837461/The\\\_Uses\\\_of\\\_the\\\_Gothic\\\_in\\\_The\\\_Bloody\\\_Chamber\\\_](https://www.academia.edu/8837461/The%5C_Uses%5C_of%5C_the%5C_Gothic%5C_in%5C_The%5C_Bloody%5C_Chamber%5C_)

Freud, Sigmund. _The Uncanny._ MIT. Web. Accessed 2 November 2018. [http://web.mit.edu/allanmc/www/freud1.pdf](http://web.mit.edu/allanmc/www/freud1.pdf)

Hollingshead, Greg. “Short Story vs Novel.” _University of Toronto Quarterly, v_ol 68, no. 4, 1999, pp. 878-879. DOI: 10.3138/utq.68.4.878

Holtzmann, Ellen. “Félicien Rops and Baudelaire: Evolution of a Frontispiece.” _Art Journal_, vol. 38, no. 2, 1978, pp. 102-106. DOI: 10.1080/00043249.1979.10793480

McHale, Brian. _Constructing Postmodernism._ Routledge, 1987. Nabokov, Vladmir. _Lolita._ Penguin, 1997.

Wisker, Gina. “Behind Closed Doors: Angela Carter, Horror and the Influence of Edgar Allen Poe.” _Re-visiting Angela Carter._ Palgrave Macmillan, 2006, pp. 178-198. DOI: 10.1057/9780230595873\_9

* * *

1.  All translations are my own [↩︎](#fnref:1)
    
2.  Don’t you love me anymore, my Carmen? [↩︎](#fnref:2)